# Installing the pirates demo

This page explains the preparations you need for running the demo.

## Installing the demo on Windows

You need the following components installed:

  1. [[SWI-Prolog][http://www.swi-prolog.org./Download.html]] (It
  is adviced to install the development version).
  2. The [[GIT][http://git-scm.com/download]] version control system is needed
  to download ClioPatria and install the demo package.
  3. [[Graphzviz][http://www.graphviz.org/Download.php]] is needed to
  render RDF graphs. This also requires an
  [[SVG][http://www.w3.org/Graphics/SVG/]] capable browser such as
  Firefox or IE9. Notable IE before version 9 will not work.

Step (2) above created a desktop-icon named *|Git bash|*. Open this.
This creates a GIT shell in your personal folder. Install ClioPatria
into =Documents= and create a folder for running this demo using the
commands below the Git shell-windows. In the example we use your
Documents folder, but you can download ClioPatria and create the Pirates
folder anywhere you like.

  ==
  $ cd Documents
  $ git clone https://github.com/ClioPatria/ClioPatria.git
  $ mkdir Pirates
  ==

Use the Windows explorer and enter the created ClioPatria folder. Open
=|win-config.exe|=. If it prompts for a directory, specify the above created
=Pirates= folder. Setup initializes a new ClioPatria project in the
target folder. Use the Windows explorer, enter the =pirates= folder and
open =|run.pl|=. This loads ClioPatria and starts the ClioPatria
web-server. Your firewall will probably complain. Authorize web-access
to SWI-Prolog.

## Installation on other systems

Getting the required software (Prolog, GIT and Graphviz) differ from
system to system. We gathered some information for [[Linux
distributions][http://www.swi-prolog.org/build/LinuxDistro.txt]].
One you have the software, a few commands in a terminal do the trick:

  ==
  $ git clone https://github.com/ClioPatria/ClioPatria.git
  $ mkdir Pirates
  $ cd Pirates
  $ ../ClioPatria/configure --with-localhost
  ...
  $ ./run.pl
  ==

The remainder of this tutorial applies to all systems.

## Initial configuration (all systems)

Use your browser and open http://localhost:3020/.  On first visit
it requires you do specify a password for the =admin= user.  Use a
password of at *|least six characters long|*.

On Windows, open *|Admin/plugins|*, switch *localhost* to _link_ and
click *|Update configuration|*. This tells the system that its primary
access is =localhost=. Using localhost enables some additional
development features and allows us to use the Google maps API without
obtaining a key from Google.

Finally, we need to install the pirates package that provides the demo
data and some additional utilities. This package is installed from the
Prolog window using the command below. This step requires GIT installed.

  ==
  ?- cpack_install(pirates).
  ==

You are now ready to [[explore the pirates domain][LoadPirates.txt]].

With ClioPatria running, you can also examine this tutorial text from
your local installation. See the *|Help/Tutorial|* entry of the
ClioPatria toolbar in your browser.

@see [[Tutorial index][Piracy.txt]]
@tbd The setup could be streamlined if setup/configure would allow
     selecting plugins.
