---+ RDF Query Languages

ClioPatria supports two query languages:
[[SPARQL][http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-sparql-query/]] and
[[SeRQL][http://rdf4j.org]]. For both languages we provide an
interactive service that presents the results as a human-readable HTML
table and an API that presents its result as RDF/XML or XML according to
the HTTP protocol definition for the query language.

We do not consider SPARQL adequate for creating rich semantic web
applications. SPARQL often needs additional application logic that is
located near the data to provide a task-specific API that drives the
user interface. Locating this logic near the data is required to avoid
protocol and latency overhead. RDF-based application logic is a perfect
match for Prolog and the RDF data is much easier queried through the
Prolog RDF libraries than through SPARQL.

That said, SPARQL is still useful to support clients designed for it.

Both SPARQL and SeRQL queries are translated to a complex Prolog goal
calling rdf/3 to resolve edges in the graph and calls to predicates from
rdfql(rdfql_runtime) that realise constraints imposed by the SeRQL
=WHERE= clause and SPARQL =FILTER= clauses.

---++ SPARQL Support

SPARQL support is based on the SPARQL specification, versioned April 6,
2006.  Status:

    * No optimization of literal operations.  Because many SPARQL
    operations require type-translations that depend on the literal
    found, many of these operations are slow.  The engine
    does optimize graph expressions.
    * Incomplete value-testing, notably on xsd:dateTime
    * Incomplete ORDER BY support.  Only ascending and all values
    are compared lexically.
    * Passes current test-suite, except tests affected by the above
    or acknowledged as errornous.

---++ SeRQL Support

SeRQL support and compatibility is based on development version
20040820, with additional support for the new 1.2 syntax and some of the
built-in functions. Both SeRQL and the HTTP API are fully defined in the
Sesame documentation.

In addition, ClioPatria provides the Sesame HTTP APIs for login,
uploading and removing statements, etc.  See _|Help/HTTP services|_
from the ClioPatria menu.
